fix(custom clock process): update Custom Clock Processes' doc (#1935)
Scalingo/documentation: src/_posts/platform/app/task-scheduling/2000-01-01-custom-clock-processes.md

index: 2
---

Scalingo provides a feature called *Custom Clock Processes* to help you run
tasks on a regular basis. Unlike jobs setup through the [Scalingo Scheduler]({% post_url platform/app/task-scheduling/2000-01-01-scalingo-scheduler.md %}),
custom clock processes do not suffer from many limitations.

## About Custom Clock Processes

Custom clock processes allow to define tasks so that they run periodically.
They give you full control over the schedule, periodicity and conditions on
which the jobs are launched, making them a powerful alternative to the Scalingo
Scheduler.

A custom clock process is basically a background process running indefinitely
in a container and waking up at specified interval(s) to launch some job(s).
This background process is responsible for controlling what job(s) must be
launched and when. It really acts as a job scheduler.

It's usually written in the language of your choice. This means that your
custom clock process can either share the same code base as your application's
or a dedicated one.

Custom clock processes also work with [Review Apps]({% post_url platform/app/2000-01-01-review-apps.md %}),
just like the parent application does.

> ### Limitations

Reviewer: Just like in the Scalingo scheduler doc page, I would prefer having this section later on the page.

Author: See https://github.com/Scalingo/documentation/pull/1915#discussion_r1097233897

Custom clock processes have very few limitations:
- For deployments: [deployment limits]({% post_url platform/deployment/2000-01-01-limits.md %})
- For containers: [containers limits]({% post_url platform/internals/2001-01-01-container-sized.md#container-limits %})

They **do not** have the limitations imposed by the Scalingo Scheduler.
Consequently, they allow to:

- Run (very) long process. The jobs you run in your custom clock process
  container(s) don't have a limited lifespan.

- Run as many scheduled jobs as you want.

- Have full control over the schedule: if you want a task to repeat every
  minute, you can.

- Have a very precise schedule, if need be.

> ### Costs

Reviewer: Maybe in this section we want to insist on the fact that these containers run 24/7 as opposed to Scalingo scheduler one-off containers that are only billed for the time the tasks run.

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/Scalingo/documentation/pull/1935/commits/9f1ebb5dcd891c940c5966552fd38b5f161b0e5e

---
title: Scheduled Jobs with Custom Clock Processes
nav: Custom Clock Processes
modified_at: 2023-02-01 17:00:00
tags: task-scheduling
index: 2
---

> Scalingo provides a feature called *Custom Clock Processes* to help you run

Reviewer 2: We don't really have such "feature", it's not a name which can be found elsewhere from here, I'm not convinced about highlighting it like here.

Author: I updated the wording in https://github.com/Scalingo/documentation/pull/1935/commits/a7a03d02828f4da629fa74557a6f3ed9c866f9c6
Please tell me if it's better?

tasks on a regular basis. Unlike jobs setup through the [Scalingo Scheduler]({% post_url platform/app/task-scheduling/2000-01-01-scalingo-scheduler.md %}),

> custom clock processes do not suffer from many limitations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
custom clock processes do not suffer from the same limitations.
```

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/Scalingo/documentation/pull/1935/commits/a7a03d02828f4da629fa74557a6f3ed9c866f9c6

This background process is responsible for controlling what job(s) must be
launched and when. It really acts as a job scheduler.

It's usually written in the language of your choice. This means that your
custom clock process can either share the same code base as your application's
or a dedicated one.

Custom clock processes also work with [Review Apps]({% post_url platform/app/2000-01-01-review-apps.md %}),
just like the parent application does.

### Limitations

Custom clock processes have very few limitations:
- For deployments: [deployment limits]({% post_url platform/deployment/2000-01-01-limits.md %})
- For containers: [containers limits]({% post_url platform/internals/2001-01-01-container-sized.md#container-limits %})

They **do not** have the limitations imposed by the Scalingo Scheduler.
Consequently, they allow to:

- Run (very) long process. The jobs you run in your custom clock process
  container(s) don't have a limited lifespan.

- Run as many scheduled jobs as you want.

- Have full control over the schedule: if you want a task to repeat every
  minute, you can.

- Have a very precise schedule, if need be.

### Costs

> The feature itself it completely free, but the container in which the

Reviewer 2: I don't really like calling it "the feature", it's not present in the dashboard nowhere, it's not "free". Or I would say "defining a new type of container for your custom clock is free, but the container [...]"

Author: I updated the paragraph in https://github.com/Scalingo/documentation/pull/1935/commits/a7a03d02828f4da629fa74557a6f3ed9c866f9c6
Please tell me if it's better?

  while(true) {
    echo "[CRON] Running tasks\n";
    $report = $cron->run();

    while ($cron->isRunning()) { }

    echo "[CRON] " . count($report->getReports()) . " tasks have been executed\n";

    foreach($report->getReports() as $job_report) {
      $output = $job_report->getOutput();
      foreach($output as $line) {
        echo "[CRON] " . $line;
    }

    sleep(60);
  }
?>
```

#### Using Node.js

The following packages may help you:
- [node-cron](https://www.npmjs.com/package/cron)
- [node-schedule](https://www.npmjs.com/package/node-schedule)

##### Example Using `node-cron` Package

The code is available in our [sample-node-express](https://github.com/Scalingo/sample-node-express)
repository.

This example leverages the `node-cron` package to:
- run `job1` every 2 minutes
- run `job2` every minute

> Both jobs just log a message.

Reviewer: best practice: we usually don't use words such as "just", "simply", etc in documentation pages

```suggestion
Both jobs log a message.
```

console.log('Started 2 cron jobs')
```

### Enabling Custom Clock Processes

Once your application has been successfully deployed, scale your custom clock
process type to 1 to start your scheduler in its own dedicated container:

```bash
scalingo --app my-app scale clock:1
```

Moreover, since Scalingo expects a `web` process type to be defined (either by
you in the `Procfile`, or automatically by a buildpack), there is most
probably a `web` process type that would start with your application. **If you
don't need it**, you can disable it by scaling the `web` process type to zero
before or after your deployment:

```bash
scalingo --app my-app scale web:0

> ```

Reviewer: suggestion: do you want to add here a link to this page (https://doc.scalingo.com/platform/app/web-less-app)?
